Crossing Isolation Boundaries #7 (#20)
apple/swift-migration-guide: Guide.docc/CommonProblems.md

Here, a new type has been created that can satisfy the needed inheritance.
Incorporating will be easiest if the conformance is only used internally by
`Island`.

## Crossing Isolation Boundaries

Any value that needs to move from one isolation domain to another

> must be `Sendable`.

Reviewer: Should we say "must either be `Sendable` or must preserve mutually exclusive access", or similar? It's no longer the case that values that move between isolation domains must _always_ have a type that conforms to `Sendable`.

Author: Yeah, exellent point.

> Using non-`Sendable` values in contexts that require `Sendable` types is a very

Reviewer: Nit: We shouldn't use the term "non-`Sendable` value". Instead, we should always talk about non-`Sendable` _types_ / types that don't conform to `Sendable` / values with non-`Sendable` type.

Author: arg we specifically talked about this but I make this mistake all the time.

common problem.
And because libraries and frameworks may be updated to use Swift's
concurrency features, these issues can come up even when your code hasn't
changed.

### Implicitly-Sendable Types

Many value types consist entirely of `Sendable` properties.
The compiler will treat types like this as implicitly `Sendable`, but _only_
when they are non-public.

```swift
public struct ColorComponents {
    public let red: Float
    public let green: Float
    public let blue: Float
}

@MainActor
func applyBackground(_ color: ColorComponents) {
}

func updateStyle(backgroundColor: ColorComponents) async {
    await applyBackground(backgroundColor)
}
```

Despite `ColorComponents` being eligible for an implicit `Sendable`

> conformance, this code will result in the following error:

Reviewer: I think we should say _why_ a `Sendable` conformance isn't inferred: `Sendable` is part of the public API contract. Public types must state an explicit `Sendable` conformance so that the compiler doesn't make any implicit API promises that you didn't intend to make.

Author: yeah for sure

```
 6 | 
 7 | func updateStyle(backgroundColor: ColorComponents) async {
 8 |     await applyBackground(backgroundColor)
   |           |- error: sending 'backgroundColor' risks causing data races
   |           `- note: sending task-isolated 'backgroundColor' to main actor-isolated global function 'applyBackground' risks causing data races between main actor-isolated and task-isolated uses
 9 | }
10 | 
```
A very straightforward solution is just to make the type's `Sendable`
conformance explicit.

```swift
public struct ColorComponents: Sendable {
    // ...
}
```

Even when trivial, adding a `Sendable` conformance should always be
done with care.
Remember that `Sendable` is a guarantee of thread-safety, and part of a
type's API contract.
Removing the conformance is an API-breaking change.

### Preconcurrency Import

Even if the type in another module is actually `Sendable`, it is not always
possible to modify its definition.
It also could be that the type is not `Sendable`, but depends on client

> cooperation for safe usage.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand what you mean by "client cooperation for safe usage". I interpret this to mean the client has to guard access to instances / take care to not access instances concurrently. In that case, I would think that we don't want to recommend a `@preconcurrency import` to suppress errors.

Author: this is just awkwardly written, and you're also making an excellent point

> In these cases, you can use a `@preconcurrency import` to address errors.

Reviewer: Nit: `@preconcurrency import` doesn't address errors; it merely suppresses them until the library is updated.

```swift
// ColorComponents defined here
@preconcurrency import UnmigratedModule

func updateStyle(backgroundColor: ColorComponents) async {
    // crossing an isolation domain here
    await applyBackground(backgroundColor)
}
```

With the addition of this `@preconcurrency import`,
`ColorComponents` remains non-`Sendable`.
However, the compiler's behavior will be altered.
When using the Swift 6 language mode, the produced here will be downgraded

> to a warning.

Reviewer: We should specify which module needs to use the Swift 6 language mode to get this behavior. Specifically, when the library migrates to the Swift 6 language mode, the diagnostic will come back as a warning given that `ColorComponents` hasn't gained a `Sendable` conformance.

> The Swift 5 language mode will produce no diagnostics at all.

Reviewer: The Swift 5 language mode will suppress diagnostics entirely only if `ColorComponents` is not annotated. If `ColorComponents` gains an `@available(*, unavailable)` conformance to `Sendable`, the compiler will warn.

}
```

Now, there is no longer an isolation boundary for the non-`Sendable` type to
cross.
And in this case, not only does this resolve the problem, it also
removes the need for an asynchronous call.
Fixing latent isolation issues can also potentially make further API
simplification possible.

Lack of `MainActor` isolation like this is, by far, the most common form of
latent isolation.
It is also very common for developers to hesitate to use this as a solution.
It is completely normal for programs with a user interface to have a large
set of `MainActor`-isolated state.
Concerns around long-running _synchronous_ work can often be addressed with
just a handful of targeted `nonisolated` functions.

### Computed Value

Instead of trying to pass a non-`Sendable` type across a boundary, it may be
possible to use a `Sendable` function that creates the needed values.

```swift
func updateStyle(backgroundColorProvider: @Sendable () -> ColorComponents) async {
    await applyBackground(using: backgroundColorProvider)
}
```

Here, it does not matter than `ColorComponents` is not `Sendable`.
By using `@Sendable` function that can compute the value, the lack of

> sendability is side-stepped entirely.

Reviewer: It also matters that the function is not isolated. For example, this wouldn't work if `backgroundColorProvider` were `@MainActor`-isolated - we'd have to assume that the `ColorComponents` value can be referenced from main actor state. The key insight is that the resulting `ColorComponents` cannot be connected to any actor-isolated state, so it's okay to cross an isolation boundary because there's no possibility for concurrent access on that value.

### Sendable Conformance

When encountering problems related to crossing isolation domains, a very
natural reaction is to just try to add a conformance to `Sendable`.
You can make a type `Sendable` in four ways.

> #### Global Isolation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Global Actor Isolation
```

> Adding global isolation to any type will make it implicitly `Sendable`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Isolating a type to a global actor will add an implicit `Sendable` conformance, because the type's mutable state will be protected by actor isolation.
```

```swift
@MainActor
public struct ColorComponents {
    // ...
}
```

> By isolating this type to the `MainActor`, any accesses for other domains

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By isolating this type to the `MainActor`, any accesses from other isolation domains
```

must be done asynchronously.
This makes it possible to safely pass instances around across domains.

#### Actors

A reference type can be made `Sendable` by changing it from a `class`

> to an `actor`.

Reviewer: I wouldn't frame this as changing a class to an actor. We can just say that similarly, actors have an implicit `Sendable` conformance because their properties are protected by actor isolation.

Author: I was really trying to sneak that in, because it is such a common thing for people to do, but I do agree.

Reviewer: Ah! We could probably have a whole section on strategies for changing a class to an actor, there are many interesting techniques like using a DispatchSerialQueue as a custom actor executor for classes backed by dispatch queues.

Author: yeah I love that idea.

```swift
actor Style {
    private var background: ColorComponents
}
```

In addition to gaining a `Sendable` conformance, actors have their own
isolation domain.
This allows them to freely work with other non-`Sendable` types internally.
This can be a major advantage, but does come with trade-offs.

Because an actor's isolated methods all must be asynchronous,
sites that access the type may now require an async context.
This alone is a reason to make such a change with care.
But further, data that is passed into or out of the actor may now itself
need to cross the new isolation boundary.
This can end up resulting in the need for yet more `Sendable` types.

#### Manual Synchronization

If you have a type that is already doing manual synchronization, you can
express this to the compiler by marking your `Sendable` conformance as
`unchecked`.

```swift

> class Style: @unchecked Sendable {

Reviewer: An alternative to a blanket `@unchecked Sendable` in the specific case of protecting state with a dispatch queue is to use a `final class` with a regular, checked `Sendable` conformance, and use `nonisolated(unsafe)` on the specific property that's protected by the `DispatchQueue`. This is fine as long as the dispatch queue is declared with `let`, because `DispatchQueue` has a conformance to `Sendable`.

Author: hmmmmm yes ok this is something I had not thought of but is really good point.

    private var background: ColorComponents
    private let queue: DispatchQueue
}
```

You should not feel compelled to remove use of queues, locks, or other
forms of manual synchronization to integrate with Swift's concurrency system.
However, most types are not inherently thread-safe.
As a general rule, if a type isn't already thread-safe, attempting to make
it `Sendable` should not be your first approach.
It is often much easier to try other techniques first, falling back to
manual synchronization only when truly necessary.

#### Sendable Reference Types

It is possible for reference types to be validated as `Sendable` without
the `unchecked` qualifier.
But, this can only be done under very narrow circumstances.

To allow a checked `Sendable` conformance a class:

- Must be `final`
- Cannot inherit from another class other than `NSObject`

> - Cannot have any mutable properties

Reviewer: It can have mutable properties as long as the properties are isolated to a global actor, e.g. this is fine

```swift
final class C {
  @MainActor var myValue = 10
}
```

Author: ok yes this definitely needs to be covered too. I struggled a little with how to address both this comment and also the use of a `nonisolated(unsafe)` property. I ended up combing them together into a new subsection "Sendable Conformance > Using Composition".

preserved, or for types that are part of a mixed Swift/Objective-C code base.

### Non-Isolated Initialization

Actor-isolated types can present a problem when they have to be initialized in
a non-isolated context.
This occurs frequently when the type is used in a default value expression or
as a property initializer.

> Note: These problems could also be a symptom of
[latent isolation](#Latent-Isolation) or an
[under-specified protocol](#Under-Specified-Protocol).

Here the non-isolated `Stylers` type is making a call to a
`MainActor`-isolated initializer.

```swift
@MainActor
class WindowStyler {
    init() {
    }
}

struct Stylers {
    static let window = WindowStyler()
}
```

This code results in the following error:

```
 7 | 
 8 | struct Stylers {
 9 |     static let window = WindowStyler()
   |                `- error: main actor-isolated default value in a nonisolated context
10 | }
11 | 
```

Globally-isolated types sometimes don't actually need to reference any global
actor state in their initializers.

```swift
@MainActor
class WindowStyler {
    nonisolated init() {
    }
}
```

By making the `init` method `nonisolated`, it is free to be called from any

> isolation domain.

Reviewer: We should explicitly mention that it's only okay to initialize `Sendable` properties from a `nonisolated init` of a global actor isolated type.
